---
layout: post
title: "Vanderbilt Essay"
date: 2018-12-23
---

During YSPA, one of the greatest tidbits of advice the academic director gave us was to work not only with our assigned lab groups, but with the other students for labs, debugging, the question of the day, and technological problems with the telescope. 
This forced all the participants to mingle with all the others while solving complex problems that only with expertise in computer programing, calculus, and physics could accomplish. Since the program consisted of high school seniors, and each person had expertise in one of these areas, everyone got to know each other very quickly.  Secret talents and other areas of interest were discussed, and soon, the collaborative environment exploded. Kids who bonded early on in unexpected ways, such as common interests in music or solving Rubix cubes, ended up understanding the material the best, and by the end of the first week, the entire lab ran like a well-oiled machine. 
When an individual was stuck on an issue, such as debugging a code: the first place they went for help was one of their teammates. These issues would get resolved with general ease, usually a missing decimal place was enough to throw off over 3 hours of work. 
However, teams rarely worked together on the QOD’s (question of the day). Usually, room-mates or lunch-buddies would solve these problems together to get their mind off the fact that it took 30 minutes to find the decimal that was missing in their code.
Lastly, but certainly not least, the problem set groups. These were made of kids who were, for lack of a better term, born to work with each other. Each problem would be done alone, but surely, on the day of the due date, every question would be checked and any debate on the means of getting the answer would be settled on the lecture room’s black board. From my problem set group, I not only guaranteed that I kept up with the material we were learning with an ability to apply it to real-world calculations, but I gained a deeper understanding of the material. Without my partners, I wouldn’t look at questions in the same way, and I would have never been able to understand any of the math, given that I hadn’t taken calculus.
 However, one of the greatest things that I learned from working with my peers at YSPA, was when to ask for help from the professor. Having access to the internet to solve problems, and all the other members, asking the teacher for help was a risky endeavor. Not only did it take courage to tell him that you didn’t understand what he talked about all morning in lecture, but half of the time the answer was, “I don’t know, what do you think?” Even though that I only got a straight answer once, the academic director brought an overarching understanding to the material that, once explained, I could convey to all of the other kids who were having trouble with the problem, and instead of just blankly using formulas to solve for the obliquity of the ecliptic of a hypothetical asteroid, I was able to understand where the numbers were coming from. If he hadn’t pushed me and my fellow YPSA members to work together as a team to solve these problems collaboratively, I would have never been able to understand his explanation. 
